---
layout: default
title:  "Deep Work"
date:   2018-04-07T08:33:53 UTC
---

## {{ page.title }}

I recently read the book [Deep Work](http://calnewport.com/books/deep-work/) by Cal Newport.
Here are some notes I took.

### Meditate Productively

- Improve your ability to think deeply by using a period in which you are occupied physically but not mentally (walking, jogging, driving, showering).
- Focus your attention on a single well-defined professional problem.
- Be wary of distractions and looping, direct your attention toward the next step.
- Structure your thinking.
  Review relevant variables for solving the problem.
  Define next-step question.
  Review clearly the answer.
  Start over again.

### Be Lazy

- At the end of the workday, shut down your consideration of work issues until the next morning.
- If you need more time then extend your workday.
- Have a strict endpoint of your workday.
- Have a shutdown ritual.
    - Check your email and calendar. Are there any urgent items?
    - Collect to do items.
    - Plan (roughly) your next day.

### Take breaks from focus

- Don't take breaks from distraction, instead take breaks from focus.
- Schedule the occasional break from focus to give in to distraction.
- Keep the time outside these blocks absolutely free from Internet use.
- Switch to another offline task if stuck (and possible).
  Or just relax.
- At the worst, change your schedule.
  Enforce at least five minutes before scheduling the Internet block.
- The goal is to rewire your brain to be comfortable resisting distracting stimuli.
- Schedule internet at work and at home.
